.TH URL 1 "2026-04-20" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
url \- cross-platform URL encode/decode/parse/build/join/query-edit

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B url encode
\fISTRING\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B url decode
\fISTRING\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B url parse
\fIURL\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B url build
\fB\-\-host\fR \fIH\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B url join
\fIBASE\fR \fIRELATIVE\fR
.br
.B url query get
\fIURL\fR \fIKEY\fR
.br
.B url query set
\fIURL\fR \fIKEY\fR \fIVALUE\fR
.br
.B url query delete
\fIURL\fR \fIKEY\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B url
is a subcommand CLI for URL manipulation: percent-encode / decode, deconstruct (\fIparse\fR) and assemble (\fIbuild\fR) URLs, resolve relative references (\fIjoin\fR, RFC 3986 §5), and edit query strings while preserving order and duplicate keys.
It runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS as a single AOT-compiled native binary.

It fills the cross-shell inconsistency gap around URL assembly.
cmd.exe has no clean subprocess-substitution, so calling \fBurl encode \fIVALUE\fR to get a result into a variable is painful; bash has no built-in URL-encoding primitive; fish's \fBstring escape --style=url\fR only exists in recent versions.
\fBurl build\fR absorbs per-value encoding into a single call.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS

.SS encode
Percent-encode \fISTRING\fR per the \fB--mode\fR variant (default \fBcomponent\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-mode
\fBcomponent\fR (default), \fBpath\fR (preserves \fI/\fR), \fBquery\fR, \fBform\fR (space → \fB+\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-form
Shorthand for \fB--mode form\fR.

.SS decode
Percent-decode \fISTRING\fR.
Default RFC 3986 (literal \fB+\fR); \fB--form\fR or \fB--mode form\fR treats \fB+\fR as space.

.SS parse
Deconstruct \fIURL\fR into fields.
Default output is plain \fBkey=value\fR lines, one per field.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit structured JSON; query is array of \fB{key,value}\fR objects preserving order and duplicates.
.TP
.B \-\-field " " \fINAME\fR
Emit a single field (\fBscheme\fR / \fBuserinfo\fR / \fBhost\fR / \fBport\fR / \fBpath\fR / \fBquery\fR / \fBfragment\fR).
Cannot be combined with \fB--json\fR.

.SS build
Assemble a URL from parts.
.TP
.B \-\-scheme " " \fIS\fR
URL scheme; defaults to \fBhttps\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-host " " \fIH\fR
Hostname (required).
.TP
.B \-\-port " " \fIN\fR
Port number (1–65535).
Omitted from output if default for scheme unless \fB--raw\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-path " " \fIP\fR
URL path.
Each segment path-mode-encoded; leading \fI/\fR added if missing.
.TP
.B \-\-query " " \fIK=V\fR
Query pair.
Both key and value form-encoded.
Repeatable — each occurrence appends.
.TP
.B \-\-fragment " " \fIF\fR
Fragment (without leading \fI#\fR).
Component-encoded.
.TP
.B \-\-raw
Skip normalisation (preserve default ports, case).

.SS join
Resolve \fIRELATIVE\fR against \fIBASE\fR per RFC 3986 §5.
Handles dot-segments, absolute-URL override, query-only refs (\fB?y\fR), fragment-only refs (\fB#s\fR), and protocol-relative URLs (\fB//host\fR).
\fIBASE\fR must be absolute.

.SS query get
Return the first value for \fIKEY\fR in \fIURL\fR's query.
Exits non-zero with \fBkey not found\fR if absent.

.SS query set
Set \fIKEY\fR to \fIVALUE\fR in \fIURL\fR's query.
Replaces all existing occurrences; appends if absent.
Output: updated URL.

.SS query delete
Remove all occurrences of \fIKEY\fR from \fIURL\fR's query.
No-op (exit 0) if key is absent.
Output: updated URL.

.SH ENCODING MODES

.TS
tab(|);
l l l l.
Mode | Alphabet | Space | Use case
component | RFC 3986 unreserved | %20 | Any URL component (default)
path | Same + / preserved | %20 | URL path segments
query | Same as component | %20 | Query-string values
form | Same as component | + | application/x-www-form-urlencoded
.TE

.SH NORMALISATION
\fBparse\fR reflects its input faithfully.
\fBbuild\fR / \fBjoin\fR / \fBquery set\fR / \fBquery delete\fR normalise output (lowercase scheme/host, strip default ports, IDN to Punycode) unless \fB--raw\fR is given.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em bad flags, unknown subcommand, missing required value, base URL not absolute.
.TP
.B 126
Runtime error \(em invalid URL syntax, \fBquery get\fR key not found.

.SH EXAMPLES
Encode and decode:
.RS
.nf
url encode "hello world"         # hello%20world
url encode "hello world" --form  # hello+world
url decode "hello%20world"       # hello world
.fi
.RE

Parse and extract:
.RS
.nf
url parse "https://api.example.com/v1?q=hello"
url parse "https://api.example.com/v1" --field host
url parse "https://x.io/?a=1&b=2&a=3" --json
.fi
.RE

Build:
.RS
.nf
url build --host api.example.com --path /v1/users --query q="hello world"
.fi
.RE

Join:
.RS
.nf
url join "https://example.com/blog/" "./2026/post-1"
url join "https://example.com/api/v1/users" "/login"
.fi
.RE

Query edit:
.RS
.nf
url query get    "https://x.io/?a=1&b=2" a
url query set    "https://x.io/?a=1" b 2
url query delete "https://x.io/?a=1&b=2" a
.fi
.RE

Compose with other tools:
.RS
.nf
ids --type uuid7 | xargs -I{} url build --host api.example.com --path /v1/{}
retry -- curl "$(url build --host api.example.com --path /health)"
.fi
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output (respected for suite consistency; url output is plain).

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR curl (1),
.BR ids (1),
.BR retry (1),
.BR clip (1)

RFC 3986 \(em URI Generic Syntax.
