.\" Round-11 verification follow-up: schedule shipped without a man page
.\" (CLAUDE.md per-tool man page convention violation flagged 2026-05-02).
.\"
.TH "SCHEDULE" "1" "2026\-05\-02" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
schedule \- cross\-platform task scheduler with cron expressions
.SH SYNOPSIS
\f[B]schedule\f[R] \f[I]subcommand\f[R] [\f[I]options\f[R]] [\f[I]args\f[R]\&...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Unified interface for creating, listing, and managing scheduled tasks using
standard cron syntax. On \f[B]Windows\f[R], delegates to \f[B]schtasks.exe\f[R]
(Windows Task Scheduler). On \f[B]Linux/macOS\f[R], manages \f[B]crontab\f[R]
entries using tagged comments (\f[B]# winix:<name>\f[R]) to track Winix\-owned
lines non\-destructively.
.PP
Cron expressions support standard 5\-field syntax (minute hour day\-of\-month
month day\-of\-week) plus the named macros \f[B]@yearly\f[R], \f[B]@monthly\f[R],
\f[B]@weekly\f[R], \f[B]@daily\f[R], and \f[B]@hourly\f[R].
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
\f[B]add\f[R] \f[B]\-\-cron\f[R] \f[I]EXPR\f[R] [\f[B]\-\-name\f[R] \f[I]NAME\f[R]] [\f[B]\-\-folder\f[R] \f[I]PATH\f[R]] \f[B]\-\-\f[R] \f[I]command\f[R] [\f[I]args\f[R]\&...]
Create a new scheduled task.
If \f[B]\-\-name\f[R] is omitted, a name is auto\-generated.
.TP
\f[B]list\f[R] [\f[B]\-\-all\f[R]] [\f[B]\-\-folder\f[R] \f[I]PATH\f[R]]
List Winix\-managed tasks.
\f[B]\-\-all\f[R] includes non\-Winix entries.
.TP
\f[B]remove\f[R] \f[I]NAME\f[R]
Remove a task by name.
.TP
\f[B]enable\f[R] \f[I]NAME\f[R]
Re\-enable a previously disabled task.
.TP
\f[B]disable\f[R] \f[I]NAME\f[R]
Disable a task without removing it.
The task definition is preserved; it will not fire until re\-enabled.
.TP
\f[B]run\f[R] \f[I]NAME\f[R]
Trigger a task to run immediately, regardless of its schedule.
.TP
\f[B]history\f[R] \f[I]NAME\f[R]
Show run history for a task (Windows only).
On Linux/macOS this returns a note that history is not available via crontab.
.TP
\f[B]next\f[R] \f[I]EXPR\f[R] [\f[B]\-\-count\f[R] \f[I]N\f[R]]
Show the next \f[I]N\f[R] (default 5) fire times for a cron expression
without creating a task.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\f[B]\-\-cron\f[R] \f[I]EXPR\f[R]
Cron expression (required for \f[B]add\f[R]).
.TP
\f[B]\-\-name\f[R] \f[I]NAME\f[R]
Task name (auto\-generated if omitted on \f[B]add\f[R]).
.TP
\f[B]\-\-folder\f[R] \f[I]PATH\f[R]
Task Scheduler folder (default: \f[B]\[rs]Winix\[rs]\f[R] on Windows; ignored
on Linux/macOS).
.TP
\f[B]\-\-count\f[R] \f[I]N\f[R]
Number of fire times to show for \f[B]next\f[R] (default: 5).
.TP
\f[B]\-\-all\f[R]
Show all tasks (not just Winix\-managed) under \f[B]list\f[R].
.TP
\f[B]\-\-json\f[R]
JSON envelope on stdout (success or error). Usage-error envelopes (e.g. unknown subcommand) go to stderr.
.TP
\f[B]\-\-color\f[R]
Force coloured output (overrides \f[B]NO_COLOR\f[R]).
.TP
\f[B]\-\-no\-color\f[R]
Disable coloured output.
.TP
\f[B]\-\-describe\f[R]
Structured JSON metadata for AI agents.
.TP
\f[B]\-\-version\f[R]
Show version.
.TP
\f[B]\-h\f[R], \f[B]\-\-help\f[R]
Show help.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
\f[B]0\f[R]
Success.
.TP
\f[B]125\f[R]
Usage error (bad arguments, invalid cron expression).
.TP
\f[B]126\f[R]
Backend failure (task not found, scheduler error).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\f[B]NO_COLOR\f[R]
If set, disables coloured output (no\-color.org).
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP
.EX
# Create a daily backup at 2 AM
schedule add \-\-cron "0 2 * * *" \-\- dotnet build

# Create a named task running every 5 minutes
schedule add \-\-cron "*/5 * * * *" \-\-name health\-check \-\- curl http://localhost:8080/health

# Show next 5 fire times for a cron expression
schedule next "0 2 * * *"

# List Winix\-managed tasks
schedule list

# Remove a named task
schedule remove health\-check

# Trigger a task to run immediately
schedule run health\-check
.EE
.SH PLATFORM NOTES
On \f[B]Windows\f[R], the \f[B]schtasks.exe\f[R] backend creates tasks in
\f[B]\[rs]Winix\[rs]\f[R] by default and surfaces run history via the Task
Scheduler event log.
.PP
On \f[B]Linux/macOS\f[R], the \f[B]crontab\f[R] backend tags Winix\-owned
lines with \f[B]# winix:<name>\f[R] for non\-destructive add/remove.
History is not available via crontab.
.SH SEE ALSO
\f[B]crontab\f[R](5), \f[B]schtasks.exe\f[R] (Windows),
\f[B]retry\f[R](1), \f[B]wargs\f[R](1), \f[B]peep\f[R](1)
.SH AUTHORS
Troy Willmot.
