.TH DEMUX 1 "2026-05-31" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
demux \- route each line of stdin to files or commands by regex; split one stream into many by pattern

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B demux
[\fB\-\-field\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-delimiter\fR \fICHAR\fR]
[\fB\-\-all\fR]
[\fB\-\-append\fR]
[\fB\-\-exit\-on\-child\-error\fR]
.B \-\-to
\fIPATTERN\fR \fIFILE\fR
|
.B \-\-exec
\fIPATTERN\fR \fICMD\fR
\fR[\fB\-\-to\fR \fIPATTERN\fR \fIFILE\fR | \fB\-\-exec\fR \fIPATTERN\fR \fICMD\fR]\fR ...
[\fB\-\-default\-to\fR \fIFILE\fR | \fB\-\-default\-exec\fR \fICMD\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B demux
is the partition verb for streams: a streaming
.IR stdin \(->\ stdout
pipe filter that routes each input line to one of N sinks (files or commands)
by regex match, and passes everything unmatched through its own stdout.

Where
.B tee
\fIcopies\fR one stream to many sinks,
.B demux
\fIroutes\fR \(em each record goes to a chosen sink, not every sink.
This is the precise demultiplexer model: one input, one-of-N outputs by selector.

Input is read one line at a time, streaming, never buffering the whole input.
Works on large files and live streams (e.g.
.BR "tail -f | demux" ).

For each line:
.IP 1. 3
If
.B \-\-field N
is set, the regex is tested against column N of the line (1-based, split on the
delimiter). An out-of-range column counts as unmatched.
Otherwise the whole line is tested.
.IP 2. 3
Routes are evaluated in declaration order.
With the default first-match behaviour, the line is routed to the first matching sink.
With
.BR \-\-all ,
the line is routed to every matching sink.
.IP 3. 3
Unmatched lines pass to stdout, or to
.B \-\-default\-to
/
.B \-\-default\-exec
if configured.

Sinks always receive the full original line (with its newline), not just the tested field.

.B \-\-exec
commands are spawned once at startup via the platform shell
.RB ( "sh \-c"
on Unix,
.B "cmd /c"
on Windows) so that shell features such as redirects and pipes work inside the command
string (e.g.
.IR "'gzip > rest.gz'" ).
Matching lines are fed to the child's stdin as they arrive; stdin is closed at EOF
and the child is reaped.
The command is shell-interpreted \(em it is assumed to be the author's own command,
with the same trust model as
.BR "sh \-c" .

If an
.B \-\-exec
child exits early, the route is marked dead, further writes to it are counted as
undelivered, and all other routes continue running.
The dead route and its undelivered count appear in the summary.

PATTERN is a
.B bare .NET regular expression
\(em not slash-delimited (that is grep's convention).
A leading or trailing
.B /
is matched literally, not treated as a delimiter.
Quote the pattern to protect regex metacharacters from the shell.

The routing summary is written to
.B stderr
(demux's stdout carries passthrough data).
Pass
.B \-\-json
to receive the summary as a JSON envelope on stderr.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-to " PATTERN FILE"
Route lines matching regex PATTERN to FILE.
The file is opened once at startup (truncated by default; use
.B \-\-append
to append).
Repeatable \(em give multiple
.B \-\-to
flags for multiple routes.
.TP
.BI \-\-exec " PATTERN CMD"
Route lines matching PATTERN to CMD's stdin.
CMD is spawned once via the platform shell.
Repeatable.
.TP
.BI \-\-default\-to " FILE"
Unmatched records \(-> FILE.
At most one
.B \-\-default\-to
or
.B \-\-default\-exec
may be given.
.TP
.BI \-\-default\-exec " CMD"
Unmatched records \(-> CMD (shell-spawned).
.TP
.BI \-\-field " N"
Test the regex against column N (1-based) instead of the whole line.
Out-of-range columns count as unmatched.
Must be \(>= 1.
.TP
.BI \-\-delimiter " CHAR"
Field delimiter used by
.B \-\-field
(default: runs of whitespace, awk-style).
Must not be empty.
.TP
.B \-\-all
Broadcast: route to every matching route (default: first-match).
.TP
.B \-\-append
File targets append instead of truncate.
.TP
.B \-\-exit\-on\-child\-error
A watched child's non-zero exit makes
.B demux
exit 2.
Without this flag, a child's non-zero exit is reported in the summary but does not
fail
.BR demux .
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit a JSON summary envelope to stderr after the run completes.
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.
.TP
.B \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR
.BR auto ,
.BR always ,
or
.BR never .
Respects
.BR NO_COLOR .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Equivalent to
.BR "\-\-color never" .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success \(em all input routed and delivered.
.TP
.B 1
Partial delivery failure \(em a route went dead mid-run and records were undelivered.
Data was lost.
Details appear on stderr.
.B Precedence:
if a route dies and a watched child also exits non-zero in the same run,
exit code
.B 1
wins (data loss is the more serious condition).
.TP
.B 2
Watched child exited non-zero \(em under
.BR \-\-exit\-on\-child\-error ,
at least one
.B \-\-exec
child failed.
Delivery was complete; no data was lost.
Note that "command not found" surfaces as the shell's
.B 127
child exit (reported in the summary and \(-> exit 2 under
.BR \-\-exit\-on\-child\-error ),
not as demux's
.BR 126 .
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em bad args, no routes, bad regex, a route flag missing an operand,
more than one
.BR \-\-default\-* ,
or
.BR \-\-field " < 1."
Stderr carries the message.
.TP
.B 126
Setup failure \(em a
.B \-\-to
file could not be opened, or the shell could not be launched.
Stderr carries the message.

.SH EXAMPLES
Split an application log \(em errors to a file, compress the rest:
.RS
.nf
cat app.log | demux --to ERROR err.log --default-exec 'gzip > rest.gz'
.fi
.RE

Multi-route split \(em errors to file, warnings to syslog, latency lines to TSV, rest compressed:
.RS
.nf
cat app.log | demux \\
  --to   'ERROR'        errors.log \\
  --exec 'WARN'         'logger -p warning' \\
  --to   '^[0-9]+ ms'  slow.tsv \\
  --default-exec        'gzip > rest.gz'
.fi
.RE

Route on column 3 (tab-delimited) by HTTP status class:
.RS
.nf
demux --field 3 --delimiter $'\\t' --to '^4' client.tsv --to '^5' server.tsv
.fi
.RE

Copy error lines to the clipboard, file the rest:
.RS
.nf
demux --exec ERROR clip --default-to rest.log
.fi
.RE

Broadcast \(em send each matching line to every matching route:
.RS
.nf
cat events.log | demux --all --to WARN warnings.log --to CRITICAL critical.log
.fi
.RE

.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
Line-oriented: a single line with no
.B \\n
is held in memory until EOF.
Many normal lines stream fine; one very large line can consume significant memory.
.IP \(bu 2
An
.B \-\-exec
child that is alive but never reads while
.BR demux 's
downstream stdout is also backpressured can stall the run mid-stream.
Only the shutdown
.B WaitForExit
is timeout-bounded (10 s, then the child is killed).
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-exec
children inherit
.BR demux 's
stdout and stderr.
A tee-style child echoes onto
.BR demux 's
own stdout, interleaved with passthrough lines.
.IP \(bu 2
No Ctrl+C / SIGKILL child cleanup in v1.
On interrupt or crash,
.B \-\-exec
children may be orphaned; they rely on shell job control or inherited-pipe EOF.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tee (1),
.BR awk (1),
.BR wargs (1),
.BR files (1)
