.TH TRASH 1 "2026-05-30" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
trash \- move files to the recycle bin or Trash instead of deleting them

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B trash
\fIpath\fR...
[\fB\-\-json\fR]

.B trash \-\-list
[\fB\-\-json\fR]

.B trash \-\-empty
[\fB\-\-yes\fR]
[\fB\-\-json\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B trash
moves files and directories to the operating system's recycle bin or Trash
instead of deleting them permanently, so they can be restored later through the
file manager's normal "Put Back" / "Restore" action.
It uses the Windows Recycle Bin, the FreeDesktop Trash on Linux, and the macOS Trash.

The default mode moves each \fIpath\fR to the trash. A one-line summary
(\fBtrash: moved N item(s) to trash\fR) is written to stderr; on success nothing
is written to stdout.

.B \-\-list
lists the current trash contents as a table (name, original path, deletion
timestamp in UTC ISO 8601, size, and trash location). The table goes to stdout.

.B \-\-empty
permanently empties the trash. When run interactively it prompts \fB[y/N]\fR and
defaults to no. When stdin is not a terminal it refuses to proceed unless
\fB\-\-yes\fR is given, so an unattended run cannot wipe the trash by accident.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-list
List current trash contents instead of trashing paths.
.TP
.B \-\-empty
Permanently empty the trash.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Skip the \fB\-\-empty\fR confirmation prompt. Required to empty non-interactively.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit a JSON envelope to stdout. Works with the default mode, \fB\-\-list\fR
(\fB{"items":[...]}\fR with \fBname\fR, \fBoriginal_path\fR, \fBdeleted\fR,
\fBsize\fR, \fBtrash\fR keys) and \fB\-\-empty\fR (\fB{"emptied":N}\fR). The
\fBemptied\fR count is approximate \(em it reflects what was enumerated.
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.
.TP
.B \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR
\fBauto\fR, \fBalways\fR, or \fBnever\fR. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Equivalent to \fB--color never\fR.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. A closed downstream pipe (e.g.
.B trash --list | head -1
) also exits 0 \(em it is not an error.
.TP
.B 1
One or more paths failed (missing path, permission denied) \(em partial failure,
like \fBrm\fR. Stderr carries the per-path message.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em unknown flag, \fB\-\-list\fR/\fB\-\-empty\fR misuse, empty or
duplicate path, or no paths given. Stderr carries the message.
.TP
.B 126
Backend failure \(em the OS recycle-bin / Trash API returned an error. Stderr
carries the message.

.SH EXAMPLES
Move a single file to the recycle bin / Trash:
.RS
.nf
trash notes.txt
.fi
.RE

Move several files and directories at once:
.RS
.nf
trash old.log build/ tmp.cache
.fi
.RE

List current trash contents:
.RS
.nf
trash --list
.fi
.RE

List as a JSON envelope:
.RS
.nf
trash --list --json
.fi
.RE

Empty the trash, prompting for confirmation:
.RS
.nf
trash --empty
.fi
.RE

Empty the trash without prompting (required non-interactively):
.RS
.nf
trash --empty --yes
.fi
.RE

.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
macOS \fB\-\-list\fR shows no original paths (\fBoriginal_path\fR is null); the
Put-Back source is in a private binary store not read in v1.
.IP \(bu 2
No \fB\-\-restore\fR / put-back in v1 \(em restore through your file manager.
.IP \(bu 2
The \fB\-\-empty\fR count is approximate (it counts what was enumerated; the OS
empty API may clear bins the listing could not enumerate).
.IP \(bu 2
On Windows, \fBcmd\fR and PowerShell do not expand globs such as \fB*.log\fR.
.IP \(bu 2
Ctrl+C mid-batch is non-atomic \(em like \fBrm\fR, already-trashed items stay trashed.
.IP \(bu 2
A failure mid-move surfaces as a per-path error; there is no partial-tree rollback
beyond the single-item \fB.trashinfo\fR cleanup on Linux.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output.

.SH CREDITS
.B trash
follows the established native safe-delete tools:
.BR trash-cli (1)
on Linux and
.B macos-trash
on macOS. It replaces \fBrm -i\fR, those tools, and PowerShell \fBRemove-Item\fR
with one cross-platform binary.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rm (1),
.BR files (1)
