.TH QR 1 "2026" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
qr \- cross-platform QR code generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qr
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIPAYLOAD\fR
.br
.B qr
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fB-\fR
.br
.B qr
\fBwifi\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB--ssid\fR \fISSID\fR \fB--password\fR \fIPASS\fR [\fB--security\fR \fI{wpa2|wpa|wep|nopass}\fR] [\fB--hidden\fR]
.br
.B qr
\fBsms\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB--number\fR \fINUMBER\fR [\fB--message\fR \fIMESSAGE\fR]
.br
.B qr
\fBmailto\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB--to\fR \fIADDRESS\fR [\fB--subject\fR \fISUBJECT\fR] [\fB--body\fR \fIBODY\fR] [\fB--cc\fR \fIADDRESS\fR] [\fB--bcc\fR \fIADDRESS\fR]
.br
.B qr
\fBgeo\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB--lat\fR \fILAT\fR \fB--lon\fR \fILON\fR [\fB--query\fR \fIQUERY\fR]
.br
.B qr
\fBtel\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB--number\fR \fINUMBER\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B qr
generates QR codes offline. The default mode encodes a text payload supplied as a positional argument or from stdin (when the positional is \fB-\fR or omitted with stdin redirected). Helper subcommands pre-format common non-text payloads (Wi-Fi, SMS, mailto, geo, tel) as URI strings per their respective specifications.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB--format\fR \fI{auto,unicode,ascii,svg,png}\fR
Output format. \fBauto\fR (default) emits unicode half-block art to a TTY and SVG when stdout is redirected.
.TP
\fB--size\fR \fIN\fR, \fB-s\fR \fIN\fR
Pixels per module (PNG/SVG only). Default 10.
.TP
\fB--error-correction\fR \fI{l,m,q,h}\fR, \fB-e\fR \fIX\fR
Error-correction level. Default \fBm\fR (~15% recovery). Use \fBh\fR for outdoor signage or printed codes likely to suffer damage.
.TP
\fB--no-margin\fR
Strip the 4-module quiet zone around the code. May reduce scannability.
.TP
\fB--output\fR \fIPATH\fR, \fB-o\fR \fIPATH\fR
Write output to a file instead of stdout.
.TP
\fB--force-binary\fR
Permit PNG output to a TTY (otherwise refused to avoid terminal corruption).
.TP
\fB--describe\fR
Emit a JSON description of the tool.
.TP
\fB--color\fR, \fB--no-color\fR
Colour control. Respects the \fBNO_COLOR\fR environment variable.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error (bad flags, missing required, empty payload, PNG to TTY without \fB--force-binary\fR).
.TP
.B 126
Runtime error (payload exceeds QR capacity, invalid UTF-8 on stdin, invalid helper field value).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Encode a URL:
.PP
.RS
.nf
qr "https://example.com"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate a Wi-Fi sticker:
.PP
.RS
.nf
qr wifi --ssid HomeNet --password s3cr3t --security wpa2 \\
  --format png --output wifi.png
.fi
.RE
.PP
Geo share Wellington, NZ:
.PP
.RS
.nf
qr geo --lat -41.2924 --lon 174.7787 --query "Wellington NZ"
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR url (1),
.BR clip (1),
.BR notify (1).
