.TH DIGEST 1 "2026-04-19" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
digest \- cross-platform cryptographic hashing and HMAC

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B digest
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR...]
.br
.B digest
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fB\-s\fR \fIVALUE\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B digest
computes cryptographic hashes (SHA-2, SHA-3, BLAKE2b) and HMACs over literal strings, standard input, or file contents.
It runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS as a single AOT-compiled native binary with no runtime dependency.

Output is a single encoded hash for string/stdin inputs, or one \fBsha256sum\fR-compatible line per file for multi-file input.
The binary-mode marker (\fB*\fR) is used on every line because \fBdigest\fR always reads files as raw bytes.

.SH OPTIONS
.SS Algorithm selection (one of)
.TP
.B \-\-sha256
SHA-256 (default).
.TP
.B \-\-sha384
SHA-384.
.TP
.B \-\-sha512
SHA-512.
.TP
.B \-\-sha3\-256
SHA3-256. Requires Windows 11 22H2+, recent Linux, or recent macOS.
.TP
.B \-\-sha3\-512
SHA3-512. Same platform requirement as SHA3-256.
.TP
.B \-\-blake2b
BLAKE2b-512.
.TP
.B \-\-sha1
SHA-1 (legacy; emits stderr warning).
.TP
.B \-\-md5
MD5 (legacy; emits stderr warning).
.TP
.BR \-a " " \fIALGO\fR ", " \-\-algo " " \fIALGO\fR
Alternative to individual flags: \fBsha256\fR, \fBsha384\fR, \fBsha512\fR, \fBsha1\fR, \fBmd5\fR, \fBsha3-256\fR, \fBsha3-512\fR, \fBblake2b\fR.

.SS HMAC mode
.TP
.B \-\-hmac " " \fIALGO\fR
Switch to HMAC mode using the given hash algorithm.
Requires exactly one of \fB--key-env\fR, \fB--key-file\fR, \fB--key-stdin\fR, \fB--key\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-key\-env " " \fIVAR\fR
Read the HMAC key from environment variable \fIVAR\fR (UTF-8 encoded).
.TP
.B \-\-key\-file " " \fIPATH\fR
Read the HMAC key from the file at \fIPATH\fR.
A trailing \fB\\n\fR or \fB\\r\\n\fR is stripped unless \fB--key-raw\fR is given.
On Unix, a stderr warning is emitted if the file is readable by group or other.
.TP
.B \-\-key\-stdin
Read the HMAC key from standard input.
Cannot be combined with a stdin payload.
A trailing newline is stripped unless \fB--key-raw\fR is given.
.TP
.B \-\-key " " \fIKEY\fR
HMAC key as a literal CLI argument.
\fBAlways emits a non-suppressible warning\fR because the key is visible to \fBps\fR, shell history, and process listings.
Use only for throwaway testing.
.TP
.B \-\-key\-raw
Preserve bytes on \fB--key-file\fR / \fB--key-stdin\fR — do not strip a trailing newline.

.SS Input selection
.TP
.BR \-s " " \fIVALUE\fR ", " \-\-string " " \fIVALUE\fR
Hash the UTF-8 bytes of the literal string \fIVALUE\fR.
Exclusive with positional file arguments.
.TP
.I FILE\fR...
Positional arguments are always treated as files.
A missing file errors out with exit code 125 rather than being hashed as a literal string.
A single \fB-\fR or no positional is read as stdin.

.SS Output format
.TP
.B \-\-hex
Hex output, lowercase (default).
.TP
.B \-\-base64
Base64 output (standard alphabet).
.TP
.B \-\-base64\-url
Base64 URL-safe variant (replaces \fB+\fR / \fB/\fR with \fB-\fR / \fB_\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-base32
Crockford base32 output (uppercase, no \fBI\fR / \fBL\fR / \fBO\fR / \fBU\fR).
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-uppercase
Uppercase hex output.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit JSON to stdout.
Single-input forms emit one object; multi-file forms emit an array.

.SS Verification
.TP
.B \-\-verify " " \fIEXPECTED\fR
Compare the computed hash against \fIEXPECTED\fR in constant time.
Hex comparison is case-insensitive; base64 and base32 are case-sensitive.
Exit 0 on match, 1 on mismatch.
Not supported with multiple files.

.SS Standard flags
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.
.TP
.B \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR
\fBauto\fR, \fBalways\fR, or \fBnever\fR. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Equivalent to \fB--color never\fR.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success, or verification match.
.TP
.B 1
Verification failed (\fB--verify\fR mismatch).
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em bad flags, unknown value, flag conflict, missing file.
.TP
.B 126
Runtime error \(em SHA-3 unavailable on this platform, file read failure.

.SH EXAMPLES
SHA-256 of a literal string:
.RS
.nf
digest -s "hello"
.fi
.RE

SHA-256 of a file (sha256sum-compatible line):
.RS
.nf
digest file.iso
.fi
.RE

Hash every text file in the current directory:
.RS
.nf
digest *.txt
.fi
.RE

SHA-512 with base64 output:
.RS
.nf
digest --sha512 --base64 -s "hello"
.fi
.RE

HMAC-SHA-256 with key from environment variable:
.RS
.nf
digest --hmac sha256 --key-env API_SECRET -s "payload"
.fi
.RE

HMAC with key piped from \fBage\fR-encrypted storage:
.RS
.nf
age --decrypt key.age | digest --hmac sha256 --key-stdin -s "msg"
.fi
.RE

Verify a known hash (exit 0 on match, 1 on mismatch):
.RS
.nf
digest --verify e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb92427ae41e4649b934ca495991b7852b855 -s ""
.fi
.RE

Pipe a hash to the clipboard:
.RS
.nf
digest file.bin | clip
.fi
.RE

.SH SECURITY
HMAC keys should never leak via \fBps\fR output, shell history, core dumps, or world-readable files.
\fBdigest\fR supports four key sources listed from safest to least safe:

.IP "1. \fB--key-stdin\fR (recommended)"
Read the key from stdin, typically piped from an external secrets manager (\fBage\fR, \fBgpg\fR, \fBpass\fR, \fBsecret-tool\fR, macOS Keychain).
The on-disk key file is never plaintext.

.IP "2. \fB--key-env\fR"
Read the key from an environment variable.
Safe if the variable is set by your shell's secrets loader or a secrets manager injecting into the process environment.

.IP "3. \fB--key-file\fR"
Read the key from a file.
On Unix, \fBdigest\fR emits a stderr warning if the file is readable by group or other, suggesting \fBchmod 0600\fR.

.IP "4. \fB--key\fR (not recommended)"
Literal key as a CLI argument.
\fBAlways emits a non-suppressible warning\fR because the key is visible to \fBps\fR, shell history, and process listings.
Use only for transient throwaway testing.

.PP
BLAKE2b keyed mode caps keys at 64 bytes per RFC 7693 §2.9.
Longer keys are rejected.
For longer keys, use \fB--hmac sha256\fR, which auto-hashes oversized keys per RFC 2104.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output.
\fBdigest\fR output is plain; this variable is respected for suite consistency.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sha256sum (1),
.BR md5sum (1),
.BR openssl (1),
.BR clip (1),
.BR ids (1)
