.TH NOTIFY 1 "2026-04-19" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
notify \- cross-platform desktop notifications + ntfy.sh push

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B notify
\fITITLE\fR [\fIBODY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B notify
sends a desktop notification and/or a push to ntfy.sh in a single invocation.
Same flag surface on Windows, macOS, and Linux as a single AOT-compiled native binary with no runtime dependency.

When \fB--ntfy\fR is set or \fB$NOTIFY_NTFY_TOPIC\fR is in the environment, both the desktop notification AND the ntfy push fire in parallel.
The default is best-effort \(em exit 0 if at least one configured backend succeeded.
Use \fB--strict\fR to require all configured backends to succeed.

.SH OPTIONS
.SS Notification content
.TP
\fITITLE\fR
The notification headline (required).
.TP
\fIBODY\fR
Optional second line of text.
.TP
.B \-\-urgency " " \fILEVEL\fR
\fBlow\fR (silent), \fBnormal\fR (default), \fBcritical\fR (sound + attention on every backend).
.TP
.B \-\-icon " " \fIPATH\fR
Icon path. Best-effort per backend: libnotify accepts paths/named icons, Windows accepts file paths, macOS ignores (no bundle).

.SS ntfy.sh push
.TP
.B \-\-ntfy " " \fITOPIC\fR
Send to ntfy.sh on \fITOPIC\fR.
Env fallback: \fB$NOTIFY_NTFY_TOPIC\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-ntfy\-server " " \fIURL\fR
Override the ntfy server URL (self-hosted).
Env: \fB$NOTIFY_NTFY_SERVER\fR. Default: \fBhttps://ntfy.sh\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-ntfy\-token " " \fITOKEN\fR
Bearer token for self-hosted ntfy with access control.
Env: \fB$NOTIFY_NTFY_TOKEN\fR.

.SS Backend selection
.TP
.B \-\-no\-desktop
Suppress the desktop backend.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-ntfy
Suppress ntfy even if env var is set.
.TP
.B \-\-strict
Exit non-zero if any configured backend fails.
Default: best-effort.

.SS Output
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit JSON output to stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI agents.

.SS Standard
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR
\fBauto\fR, \fBalways\fR, or \fBnever\fR. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success \(em at least one configured backend succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
\fB--strict\fR mode; at least one backend failed.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em bad flags, missing TITLE, no backends configured.
.TP
.B 126
All backends failed.

.SH EXAMPLES
Basic desktop notification:
.RS
.nf
notify "build done"
.fi
.RE

Title and body:
.RS
.nf
notify "tests done" "5 of 200 failed"
.fi
.RE

Critical urgency:
.RS
.nf
notify "deploy failed" --urgency critical
.fi
.RE

Desktop and ntfy.sh push:
.RS
.nf
notify "alert" --ntfy myalerts
.fi
.RE

Env-set ntfy topic:
.RS
.nf
NOTIFY_NTFY_TOPIC=alerts notify "see you"
.fi
.RE

Push only (headless / CI):
.RS
.nf
notify "build $BUILD_ID ok" --no-desktop --ntfy ci
.fi
.RE

Self-hosted ntfy with auth:
.RS
.nf
notify "deploy ok" --ntfy deploys --ntfy-server https://ntfy.example.com --ntfy-token tk_xyz
.fi
.RE

Compose with other commands:
.RS
.nf
make test && notify "tests done"
timeit slow-script.sh && notify "done"
.fi
.RE

.SH BACKEND BEHAVIOUR

.SS Windows
Inline PowerShell + WinRT toast XML.
Creates a per-user Start Menu shortcut at \fB%APPDATA%\\Microsoft\\Windows\\Start Menu\\Programs\\Winix Notify.lnk\fR on first run \(em this is an Action Center requirement (toasts need an AppUserModelID).
The shortcut is created idempotently and is harmless to delete.
Cold-start latency: ~400ms (PowerShell startup).

.SS macOS
\fBosascript\fR with an inline AppleScript snippet.
\fB--icon\fR is ignored on macOS (proper notification APIs require a signed app bundle which a CLI binary can't have).

.SS Linux
\fBnotify-send\fR (libnotify CLI).
Install: \fBlibnotify-bin\fR (Debian/Ubuntu), \fBlibnotify\fR (Fedora), \fBlibnotify\fR (Arch).
If missing, \fBnotify\fR exits with a clear install hint.
For headless / SSH usage, pair with \fB--no-desktop --ntfy TOPIC\fR.

.SH NTFY INTEGRATION
ntfy.sh is a free, self-hostable pub-sub push notification service.
Topics are URL paths \(em anyone who knows the topic name can publish or subscribe.
\fBTreat the topic name as a password.\fR
For sensitive use cases, self-host ntfy and use \fB--ntfy-token\fR for Bearer auth.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NOTIFY_NTFY_TOPIC
Default ntfy topic when \fB--ntfy\fR is not given.
.TP
.B NOTIFY_NTFY_SERVER
Default ntfy server URL.
Falls back to \fBhttps://ntfy.sh\fR if unset.
.TP
.B NOTIFY_NTFY_TOKEN
Default Bearer token for self-hosted ntfy with access control.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output.
\fBnotify\fR output is plain; this variable is respected for suite consistency.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR notify-send (1),
.BR osascript (1),
.BR clip (1),
.BR timeit (1),
.BR retry (1)
