.TH ENVVAULT 1 "2026-04-22" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
envvault \- cross-platform keychain-backed environment variable manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B envvault
\fINAMESPACE\fR[,\fINAMESPACE\fR...] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]
.br
.B envvault
\fB\-\-set\fR \fINAMESPACE\fR \fIKEY\fR [\fIKEY\fR...]
.br
.B envvault
\fB\-\-value\fR \fIVALUE\fR \fB\-\-set\fR \fINAMESPACE\fR \fIKEY\fR
.br
.B envvault
\fB\-\-get\fR \fINAMESPACE\fR \fIKEY\fR
.br
.B envvault
\fB\-\-unset\fR \fINAMESPACE\fR \fIKEY\fR
.br
.B envvault
\fB\-\-list\fR [\fINAMESPACE\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B envvault
stores named environment variables in the OS key store and merges them into the environment of child processes on demand.
It is wire-compatible with \fBenvchain\fR(1) on macOS and Linux and adds a native Windows backend.

Values are stored per-user in the OS key store:
.IP \(bu 3
\fBWindows\fR: Credential Manager (DPAPI-protected).
.IP \(bu 3
\fBmacOS\fR: login Keychain via \fBsecurity\fR(1).
.IP \(bu 3
\fBLinux\fR: libsecret via \fBsecret-tool\fR(1).
.PP
Secrets never leave the OS key store except when:
.IP \(bu 3
merged into a child process environment by the exec form, or
.IP \(bu 3
explicitly printed by \fB\-\-get\fR.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-set " " \fINAMESPACE\fR " " \fIKEY\fR " [" \fIKEY\fR "..." "]"
Store one or more keys in \fINAMESPACE\fR.
Prompts for each value on the controlling terminal with input hidden.
If stdin is piped, one line per key is read.

.TP
.BR \-\-value " " \fIVALUE\fR
Non-interactive value for \fB\-\-set\fR.
Only valid with a single key.
Exposes the value on the process argv and in shell history; prefer the interactive prompt for real secrets.

.TP
.BR \-\-get " " \fINAMESPACE\fR " " \fIKEY\fR
Print the stored value to stdout.
Exits with status 127 if the namespace or key is not found.

.TP
.BR \-\-unset " " \fINAMESPACE\fR " " \fIKEY\fR
Remove \fIKEY\fR from \fINAMESPACE\fR.
Exits with status 127 if the key does not exist.

.TP
.BR \-\-list " [" \fINAMESPACE\fR "]"
With no argument, print the list of namespaces.
With a namespace, print the list of keys in that namespace.
Values are never printed.

.TP
.B \-\-json
Produce JSON output for \fB\-\-list\fR.

.TP
.B \-\-noecho
Accepted for envchain compatibility.
\fB\-\-set\fR already hides interactive input by default.

.TP
.B \-\-require\-passphrase
Deferred to v1.1.
Currently exits with status 125 and a clear message.

.TP
.BR \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR ", " \-\-no\-color
ANSI colour control: \fBalways\fR, \fBnever\fR, or \fBauto\fR (default: respect \fBNO_COLOR\fR).

.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI agents.

.TP
.B \-\-help
Show help and exit.

.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em bad flags, missing required arguments, conflicting options, deferred feature requested (\fB\-\-require\-passphrase\fR).
.TP
.B 126
Runtime error \(em key store unavailable, permission denied launching \fICOMMAND\fR.
.TP
.B 127
Not found \(em namespace or key missing on \fB\-\-get\fR / \fB\-\-unset\fR; \fICOMMAND\fR not on PATH for exec form.
.TP
Exec form: the exit code of \fICOMMAND\fR is passed through verbatim when the child runs to completion.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set to any non-empty value, disables ANSI colour output.
See <https://no-color.org>.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Store a GitHub token (interactive, hidden input):
.B envvault \-\-set github GITHUB_TOKEN
.TP
Run a command with a namespace's variables injected:
.B envvault github gh pr list
.TP
Merge multiple namespaces in order (later wins on collisions):
.B envvault github,aws ./deploy.sh
.TP
Script-friendly non-interactive set:
.B envvault \-\-value "ghp_xxx..." \-\-set github GITHUB_TOKEN
.TP
List all namespaces:
.B envvault \-\-list
.TP
List keys in one namespace:
.B envvault \-\-list github
.TP
Alias for envchain muscle memory:
.B alias envchain=envvault

.SH BUGS
macOS enumeration uses a self-healing index; entries added via the raw \fBsecurity\fR(1) CLI bypassing \fBenvvault\fR won't appear in \fB\-\-list\fR until a subsequent envvault write re-establishes the index.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR envchain (1),
.BR secret-tool (1),
.BR security (1),
.BR keychain (1),
.BR protect (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Troy Willmot
