.TH UNPROTECT 1 "2026-04-21" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
unprotect \- decrypt files encrypted by protect
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B unprotect
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR]
.br
.B unprotect
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B unprotect
is the companion to
.B protect
(1).
It decrypts files encrypted by
.B protect
using the same native OS key-storage primitive (DPAPI on Windows, Keychain on macOS, libsecret on Linux).

Decryption succeeds only if:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
The file was encrypted on the current machine and by the current OS user (default scope).
.IP \(bu 2
Or, the file was encrypted with \fB--scope machine\fR on Windows/macOS, and you have access to the machine key.
.IP \(bu 2
And, the OS key store still has the key available.
.RE

If any of these conditions fail, decryption fails with a clear error message.
Truncation and tampering are detected via AEAD authentication or DPAPI integrity checks.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o " " \fIPATH\fR ", " \-\-output " " \fIPATH\fR
Write decrypted output to \fIPATH\fR instead of the default (strip \fB.prot\fR suffix for files, or stdout for stdin).
Mutually exclusive with \fB--in-place\fR.
Cannot be equal to the input path.

.TP
.B \-\-in\-place
Decrypt the file in place using atomic rename (temp write → verify → rename).
Mutually exclusive with \fB-o\fR / \fB--output\fR.
The \fB--rm\fR / \fB--remove-source\fR flag is implicit.

.TP
.BR \-\-rm ", " \-\-remove\-source
Delete the encrypted file after successful decryption.
Paired with explicit output path, keeps the encrypted source.
Implied by \fB--in-place\fR.

.TP
.BR \-\-scope " " [\fBuser\fR | \fBmachine\fR]
Key-derivation scope to attempt for decryption.
Default: \fBuser\fR.
Must match the scope used when encrypting.
.RS
.IP \fBuser\fR 8
Decrypt with the current user's key (Windows DPAPI CurrentUser, macOS login Keychain, Linux libsecret).
.IP \fBmachine\fR 8
Decrypt with the machine key (Windows DPAPI LocalMachine, macOS System Keychain).
Not supported on Linux; will fail at decryption time.
.RE

If the file's embedded platform marker indicates a scope mismatch, decryption fails with a clear suggestion.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-verify
Skip round-trip verification.
Normally, after decryption the tool computes a hash and compares it to the hash computed during encryption.
\fB--no-verify\fR is faster but provides less assurance.

.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Overwrite an existing destination file.
By default \fBunprotect\fR refuses to clobber an existing destination and exits 125.
With \fB--force\fR the existing destination is removed and re-created exclusively (POSIX \fBO_EXCL\fR).
This is symlink-safe: a symlink at the destination is unlinked itself rather than written through to its target,
so an attacker cannot redirect the write by planting a symlink (e.g. to \fI/etc/passwd\fR) at the output path.

.TP
.BR \-\-color [=\fIWHEN\fR]
Force coloured output; bare \fB--color\fR = always.
Valid values: \fBauto\fR (default), \fBalways\fR, \fBnever\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable coloured output. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.

.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.

.TP
.B \-\-help
Show help and exit.

.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH FILE MODES
.TP
.B Positional file argument
.B unprotect FILE.prot
decrypts \fIFILE\fR\fB.prot\fR to \fIFILE\fR (strips the \fB.prot\fR suffix).
Use \fB-o\fR, \fB--in-place\fR, or \fB--rm\fR to customize.

.TP
.B Stdin (default or explicit \fB-\fR)
.B unprotect < FILE.prot
or
.B unprotect -
reads from stdin and writes to stdout (or \fB-o PATH\fR).

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Decrypt a protected file:
.B unprotect config.json.prot
.TP
Decrypt in place (atomic):
.B unprotect config.json.prot \-\-in\-place
.TP
Decrypt and delete the encrypted file after verification:
.B unprotect api.key.prot \-\-rm
.TP
Decrypt from stdin to an output file:
.B cat secret.prot | unprotect \-o secret.txt
.TP
Compose with digest: decrypt an HMAC key and use it:
.B unprotect < api.key.prot | digest \-\-hmac sha256 \-\-key\-stdin "payload"
.TP
Decrypt and decompress:
.B unprotect < backup.prot | zcat | tar \-x

.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error: bad flags, output path equals input, format mismatch, scope/platform unsupported.
.TP
.B 126
Runtime error: decryption failed, wrong platform/user, key store unavailable, wrong scope, truncated ciphertext, tampered data.

.SH PLATFORM NOTES
.SS Windows
Decrypts files encrypted with either user or machine scope (requires appropriate key access).
Files encrypted by a different user cannot be decrypted.
Files encrypted on a different machine cannot be decrypted.

.SS macOS
Decrypts files encrypted with user scope (login Keychain) or machine scope (System Keychain, requires root/admin).
Files encrypted by a different user cannot be decrypted.
Files encrypted on a different machine cannot be decrypted.

.SS Linux
Decrypts files encrypted with user scope only.
Files encrypted by a different user cannot be decrypted.
Files encrypted on a different machine cannot be decrypted.
libsecret-tools must be installed.

.SH CROSS-PLATFORM FAILURE (BY DESIGN)
Encrypted files are explicitly not portable across machines or users.
.B unprotect
fails clearly if:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
The file was encrypted on a different machine (wrong OS key).
.IP \(bu 2
The file was encrypted by a different user (wrong user key).
.IP \(bu 2
The file was encrypted with \fB--scope machine\fR but you're decrypting with \fB--scope user\fR (or vice versa).
.IP \(bu 2
The OS key store no longer has the key (e.g., key deleted, Keychain/libsecret cleared).
.IP \(bu 2
The file is truncated or has been tampered with (AEAD/DPAPI tag mismatch).
.RE

This is deliberate: zero user key management means the OS key is the source of truth, and portability is sacrificed for that simplicity.
For portable encryption, use
.BR age (1),
.BR gpg (1),
or
.BR sops (1).

.SH FILE FORMAT
Encrypted files start with a 22-byte header: magic (\fBWPRT\fR), version (1), backend marker, and a 16-byte random FileId.
The backend-marker byte identifies which key store encrypted the file
(\fB0x01\fR DPAPI-user, \fB0x02\fR DPAPI-machine, \fB0x10\fR Keychain-user, \fB0x11\fR Keychain-machine, \fB0x20\fR libsecret-user).
Files are then chunked (64 KB per chunk), each encrypted with either DPAPI or AES-256-GCM.
Every chunk is bound to its specific file and position via the FileId, chunk index, and final-chunk flag (in AEAD AAD on Keychain/libsecret;
inside the protected blob on DPAPI). This detects truncation, chunk reorder, and cross-file substitution at decryption.

.SH INTEGRITY MODEL
The per-chunk binding defends against an attacker with write access to the \fB.prot\fR file but no key access
(untrusted backup software, cloud sync, shared NAS). It does not defend against an attacker who already has
key access — the OS keystore, not the file format, is the trust boundary in that case.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR protect (1) \- encrypt files
.BR digest (1) \- cryptographic hashing and HMAC
.BR unprotect \-\-describe \- structured metadata
.BR unprotect \-\-help \- human-readable help
