.TH HCAT 1 "2026-05-30" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hcat \- netcat for HTTP: serve a folder, inspect requests, or pipe a command over HTTP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hcat
[\fIdir\fR]
[\fB\-\-lan\fR]
[\fB\-\-port\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-https\fR]

.B hcat serve
[\fIdir\fR]
[\fB\-\-upload\fR]
[\fB\-\-upload\-dir\fR \fIDIR\fR]
[\fB\-\-lan\fR]

.B hcat inspect
[\fB\-\-status\fR \fICODE\fR]
[\fB\-\-json\fR]
[\fB\-\-capture\fR \fIN\fR]

.B hcat pipe
\fB\-\-\fR \fIcommand\fR...

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hcat
is an instant HTTP server in a single native binary \(em "netcat for HTTP".
Where
.BR nc (1)
gives you a raw TCP socket,
.B hcat
gives you an HTTP one. It has four modes:

A bare
.B hcat
serves the current directory on
.B 127.0.0.1
for local preview.
.B hcat serve
.RI [ dir ]
serves static files with an automatic directory listing.
.B hcat inspect
echoes each request back as JSON, httpbin\-style.
.B hcat pipe \-\-
.I command
runs
.I command
once per request (CGI\-style): the request body is piped to the child's stdin,
its stdout becomes the response body, request metadata is exposed as environment
variables, exit 0 maps to 200 and non\-zero to 500, and the child's stderr is
written to the server console (never to the HTTP response).

.SS Network safety
By default
.B hcat
binds
.B 127.0.0.1
only \(em network exposure is always explicit.
.B \-\-lan
binds
.B 0.0.0.0
(every interface) and prints a QR code with the LAN URL.
.B \-\-host
binds an explicit address.
.B \-\-local
forces loopback\-only, overriding any earlier
.B \-\-lan
/
.BR \-\-host .
There is no authentication or IP allowlist in v1.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-lan
Bind
.B 0.0.0.0
to share on the local network (prints a QR code).
LAN URLs and the QR prefer gateway\-routed addresses; virtual host\-only adapters (Hyper\-V/WSL/Docker) are skipped unless none have a gateway.
Use \fB\-\-host\fR to pin a specific address.
.TP
.B \-\-local
Force loopback\-only binding (overrides
.B \-\-lan
/
.BR \-\-host ).
.TP
.B \-\-host " " \fIADDR\fR
Explicit bind address. A non\-loopback address exposes the server.
.TP
.B \-\-port " " \fIN\fR
Listen port (default 8080).
.TP
.B \-\-https
Enable TLS with an in\-memory self\-signed certificate (clients show a trust warning).
.TP
.B \-\-upload
(serve) Enable the POST upload receiver. Files are saved to
.B ./uploads
(created, not served).
.TP
.B \-\-upload\-dir " " \fIDIR\fR
(serve) Upload target directory (default
.BR ./uploads ).
Pointing it at the served root makes uploads downloadable.
.TP
.B \-\-spa
(serve) SPA fallback: a request matching no file, made as a browser navigation
.RB ( Accept:
text/html), returns the index file with status 200 so client\-side routers survive deep\-link refresh.
Asset/API misses (\fB*/*\fR, application/json) still 404. Disables directory listing.
.TP
.B \-\-spa\-index " " \fIFILE\fR
(serve, with \fB\-\-spa\fR) SPA fallback filename (default index.html); a bare filename in the served root.
.TP
.B \-\-status " " \fICODE\fR
(inspect) HTTP status to respond with (default 200).
.TP
.B \-\-capture " " \fIN\fR
(CI) Exit after capturing N requests.
.TP
.B \-\-exit\-on " " \fIEXPR\fR
(CI) Exit when a request matches:
.BR path=/x ,
.BR method=POST ,
or
.BR body~text .
.BR body~
is inspect\-only (serve and pipe do not capture the request body); using it elsewhere is a usage error.
.TP
.B \-\-timeout " " \fIDUR\fR
(CI) Fail (exit 1) if the stop condition is not met within DUR (e.g.
.BR 30s ,
.BR 5m ).
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit machine\-readable JSON to stdout: a JSONL request\-record stream (inspect/pipe)
or per\-request access\-log lines (serve). The banner, human log, and errors stay on stderr.
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.
.TP
.B \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR
\fBauto\fR, \fBalways\fR, or \fBnever\fR. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Equivalent to \fB--color never\fR.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success \(em clean shutdown (Ctrl+C), or a CI stop condition
.RB ( \-\-capture / \-\-exit\-on )
was met.
.TP
.B 1
A CI stop condition was not met before
.B \-\-timeout
elapsed.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em unknown subcommand/flag, bad
.B \-\-exit\-on
key, non\-integer
.BR \-\-port / \-\-status / \-\-capture ,
or
.B pipe
with no command. Stderr carries the message.
.TP
.B 126
Startup failure \(em the port could not be bound (e.g. already in use) or the
self\-signed certificate could not be created. Stderr carries the message.

.SH EXAMPLES
Serve the current directory on localhost:
.RS
.nf
hcat
.fi
.RE

Share a folder on your LAN (QR printed):
.RS
.nf
hcat serve ./public --lan
.fi
.RE

Receive uploads into ./uploads:
.RS
.nf
hcat serve ./public --upload
.fi
.RE

Catch and print incoming webhooks:
.RS
.nf
hcat inspect --lan
.fi
.RE

Record requests as JSONL:
.RS
.nf
hcat inspect --json > requests.jsonl
.fi
.RE

Expose jq over HTTP:
.RS
.nf
hcat pipe -- jq .
.fi
.RE

Exit cleanly after catching 3 requests (CI):
.RS
.nf
hcat inspect --capture 3 --timeout 30s
.fi
.RE

.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
Single\-command pipe only \(em no per\-path routing in v1.
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-https
uses an in\-memory self\-signed certificate; clients show a trust warning (dev / LAN use).
.IP \(bu 2
No authentication or IP allowlist in v1 \(em
.B \-\-lan
exposes the server to everyone on your network.
.IP \(bu 2
The binary is ~12 MB (the ASP.NET Core / Kestrel dependency).
.IP \(bu 2
An interrupted upload may leave a partial file at the target name \(em no atomic
write\-then\-rename in v1 (F11).
.IP \(bu 2
Concurrent pipe\-mode child stderr may interleave on the server console \(em
diagnostic only, never part of any HTTP response (F12).
.IP \(bu 2
Request bodies larger than 1 MiB are truncated in the record and marked
.BR bodyTruncated .
.IP \(bu 2
If the child streams stdout, the 200 status is committed before its exit code is
known, so a non\-zero exit after output flushes cannot be downgraded to 500.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nc (1),
.BR qr (1),
.BR curl (1)
.PP
hcat \-\-describe for JSON metadata.
