.TH MKAUTH 1 "2026-06-07" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mkauth \- compute HTTP Authorization headers for curl and scripts

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkauth basic
\fB\-\-user\fR \fINAME\fR
\fB\-\-password\fR \fIREF\fR
[\fIoptions\fR]

.B mkauth bearer
\fB\-\-token\fR \fIREF\fR
[\fIoptions\fR]

.B mkauth oauth1
\fB\-\-method\fR \fIVERB\fR
\fB\-\-url\fR \fIURL\fR
\fB\-\-consumer\-key\fR \fIK\fR
\fB\-\-consumer\-secret\fR \fIREF\fR
[\fIoptions\fR]

.B mkauth jwt
\fB\-\-alg\fR \fIALG\fR
\fB\-\-key\fR \fIREF\fR
[\fIclaim flags\fR]
[\fIoptions\fR]

.B mkauth azure\-storage
\fB\-\-account\fR \fINAME\fR
\fB\-\-key\fR \fIREF\fR
\fB\-\-method\fR \fIVERB\fR
\fB\-\-url\fR \fIURL\fR
[\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkauth
is a pure, stateless HTTP Authorization header calculator.
It computes one header and prints it to stdout, then exits.
No network I/O, no token storage, no caching.

Use it in command substitution with
.BR curl :
.RS
.nf
curl \-H "$(mkauth oauth1 \-\-method GET \-\-url https://api.example.com/v1/me \\
              \-\-consumer\-key abc \-\-consumer\-secret 'vault:api/consumer' \\
              \-\-token def \-\-token\-secret 'vault:api/token')" \\
     https://api.example.com/v1/me
.fi
.RE

The computed header is written to stdout as a \fBName: Value\fR line.
.B \-\-show\-base\-string
debug output goes to stderr.
Warnings (literal\-secret exposure, PLAINTEXT over non\-HTTPS) go to stderr.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS

.SS basic
Computes \fBAuthorization: Basic base64(user:password)\fR per RFC 7617.
A username containing \fB:\fR is a usage error.

.SS bearer
Outputs \fBAuthorization: Bearer <token>\fR per RFC 6750.
Pure passthrough \(em the resolved token value is used as\-is.

.SS oauth1
Computes the full OAuth 1.0a \fBAuthorization\fR header (RFC 5849) including
the signature base string, signing key, and HMAC or PLAINTEXT signature.

.B Scope note:
.B mkauth oauth1
.I signs
a request given credentials; it does
.B not
perform the OAuth 1.0a 3\-legged request\-token\(enauthorize\(enaccess\-token dance.
Token acquisition is a separate flow, out of scope for this tool.

The signature base string is
\fBMETHOD & pct(base_url) & pct(normalized_params)\fR.
The signing key is
\fBpct(consumer_secret) & pct(token_secret)\fR.
Percent\-encoding follows RFC 3986 (unreserved set only; \fB~\fR is literal, space is \fB%20\fR, not \fB+\fR).
Parameters are sorted lexicographically and merged from URL query, \fB\-\-param\fR, and \fBoauth_*\fR params (excluding \fBrealm\fR and \fBoauth_signature\fR).
PLAINTEXT sends the signing key as the signature; a warning is emitted to stderr if the URL scheme is not \fBhttps\fR.

.SS jwt
Mints a JSON Web Token (RFC 7519) and wraps it as \fBAuthorization: Bearer <jwt>\fR.
Supports HS256/384/512, RS256/384/512, and ES256/384/512.
ES signatures use IEEE\-P1363 \fBr\(cbs\fR form per JOSE (RFC 7518).
An ES algorithm fixes the EC curve (RFC 7518 \(sc3.4): \fBES256\fR=P\-256, \fBES384\fR=P\-384, \fBES512\fR=P\-521;
the supplied PEM key must use the matching curve or signing fails.
The JOSE \fBalg\fR and \fBtyp\fR header parameters are set by \fB\-\-alg\fR and cannot be overridden via \fB\-\-header\fR.

.SS azure\-storage
Computes the \fBAuthorization: SharedKey account:signature\fR header for Azure Storage
REST API requests (Blob, Queue, and File services).
StringToSign = VERB + 12 fixed header lines + CanonicalizedHeaders + CanonicalizedResource.
Signature = base64(HMAC\-SHA256(base64\-decode(key), UTF\-8(StringToSign))).
Table canonicalization and SharedKeyLite are not supported.

.SH SECRET REFERENCES
Every secret\-bearing flag takes a secret reference string with a scheme prefix.
Secrets are never required as bare values on argv.

.TP
.BI env: NAME
Value of environment variable
.I NAME
at runtime.

.TP
.BI file: PATH
Contents of file at
.IR PATH .
Surrounding whitespace is trimmed (see below).

.TP
.BI vault: NS/KEY
Value from the OS keychain via Winix.SecretStore
(DPAPI on Windows, Keychain on macOS, libsecret on Linux).
Splits on the
.B first
\fB/\fR \(em namespace cannot contain \fB/\fR, key may.

.TP
.B \- or stdin
Read from standard input.
At most one secret per invocation may use stdin.

.TP
.BI literal: VALUE
The literal value, used
.B verbatim
(no trimming); an empty or whitespace\-only \fBliteral:\fR is allowed.
.B Emits a ps/shell\-history exposure warning to stderr.
Use as an explicit escape hatch only.

.PP
.B Whitespace trimming:
every reference\-resolved source (\fBenv:\fR, \fBfile:\fR, \fBvault:\fR, \fBstdin\fR) has
.B all surrounding whitespace stripped
(leading and trailing, including trailing newlines), so the same key signs the same way
regardless of delivery. Only \fBliteral:\fR is used verbatim.

.PP
.B Empty secrets:
a secret resolved from \fBenv:\fR/\fBfile:\fR/\fBvault:\fR/\fBstdin\fR that is empty
(or whitespace\-only, which trims to empty) is an
.B error
(exit 126) naming the source \(em signing with an empty key produces a silently\-wrong header.
To send an empty secret deliberately, use an explicit empty \fBliteral:\fR.

.SH OPTIONS

.SS Common flags (all subcommands)
.TP
.B \-\-value\-only
Print the header value only; strips the \fBAuthorization:\fR name but keeps the
scheme prefix (e.g. \fBBearer <jwt>\fR, \fBBasic <b64>\fR). Not a bare token.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit a JSON envelope to stdout:
\fB{"scheme":"...","header_name":"Authorization","header_value":"..."}\fR.
With \fB\-\-show\-base\-string\fR, adds \fB"base_string":"..."\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-base\-string
Emit the computed signature base string or StringToSign.
In plain mode: to stderr. In \fB\-\-json\fR mode: included in the envelope.
Applies to \fBoauth1\fR and \fBazure\-storage\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.
.TP
.BR \-\-color [=\fIWHEN\fR]
Coloured output: auto (default when omitted), always, or never.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable coloured output. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SS basic flags
.TP
.BI \-\-user " NAME"
Username (required). Must not contain \fB:\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-password " REF"
Secret reference for the password (required).

.SS bearer flags
.TP
.BI \-\-token " REF"
Secret reference for the bearer token (required).

.SS oauth1 flags
.TP
.BI \-\-method " VERB"
HTTP method (required). Upper-cased for the base string.
.TP
.BI \-\-url " URL"
Full request URL (required). Query params are parsed and included in the signature base.
.TP
.BI \-\-consumer\-key " K"
\fBoauth_consumer_key\fR (required).
.TP
.BI \-\-consumer\-secret " REF"
Secret reference for the consumer secret (required).
.TP
.BI \-\-token " T"
\fBoauth_token\fR (optional; omit for 2\-legged).
.TP
.BI \-\-token\-secret " REF"
Secret reference for the token secret (optional; empty = 2\-legged).
.TP
.BI \-\-signature\-method " M"
Signature method: \fBHMAC\-SHA1\fR (default), \fBHMAC\-SHA256\fR, \fBPLAINTEXT\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-param " k=v"
Extra/body parameter for the signature base (repeatable).
Use for \fBapplication/x\-www\-form\-urlencoded\fR body params.
.TP
.BI \-\-realm " R"
\fBrealm\fR value (not part of the signature base).
.TP
.BI \-\-timestamp " N"
\fBoauth_timestamp\fR (Unix seconds). Overrides the auto\-generated value.
.TP
.BI \-\-nonce " S"
\fBoauth_nonce\fR. Overrides the auto\-generated value.

.SS jwt flags
.TP
.BI \-\-alg " ALG"
Signing algorithm (default: \fBHS256\fR): \fBHS256\fR, \fBHS384\fR, \fBHS512\fR, \fBRS256\fR, \fBRS384\fR, \fBRS512\fR, \fBES256\fR, \fBES384\fR, \fBES512\fR.
ES algorithms require a matching curve (ES256=P\-256, ES384=P\-384, ES512=P\-521).
.TP
.BI \-\-key " REF"
Secret reference for the signing key (required).
HS: shared secret; RS/ES: PEM private key.
.TP
.BI \-\-claim " k=v"
String claim (repeatable).
.TP
.BI \-\-claim\-num " k=v"
Numeric claim — value parsed as a number (for NumericDate fields like \fBexp\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-claim\-json " k=v"
Raw JSON claim — value parsed as raw JSON.
.TP
.BI \-\-claims\-file " PATH"
JSON object file merged into the claim set.
.TP
.B \-\-claims\-stdin
Merge a JSON object from stdin. Mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-key stdin\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-iss " S"
\fBiss\fR (issuer) standard claim.
.TP
.BI \-\-sub " S"
\fBsub\fR (subject) standard claim.
.TP
.BI \-\-aud " S"
\fBaud\fR (audience) standard claim.
.TP
.BI \-\-exp " DURATION"
\fBexp\fR = now + DURATION (e.g. \fB1h\fR, \fB30m\fR, \fB3600s\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-iat
Set \fBiat\fR to now.
.TP
.BI \-\-nbf " DURATION"
\fBnbf\fR = now + DURATION.
.TP
.BI \-\-kid " S"
\fBkid\fR JOSE header parameter.
.TP
.BI \-\-header " k=v"
Additional JOSE header parameter (repeatable). Accepts \fBname=value\fR or \fBname: value\fR.
\fBalg\fR and \fBtyp\fR are reserved (set by \fB\-\-alg\fR) and rejected as a usage error; distinct\-cased names like \fBAlg\fR are allowed.

.SS azure\-storage flags
.TP
.BI \-\-account " NAME"
Storage account name (required).
.TP
.BI \-\-key " REF"
Account key, base64\-encoded (required). Decoded to the HMAC key.
.TP
.BI \-\-method " VERB"
HTTP method (required).
.TP
.BI \-\-url " URL"
Request URL (required). Canonicalized to \fB/account/path\fR + sorted query.
.TP
.BI \-\-x\-ms\-date " S"
The \fBx\-ms\-date\fR header value (RFC1123 GMT). Defaults to now. Must match the value sent with the request.
.TP
.BI \-\-x\-ms\-version " V"
\fBx\-ms\-version\fR header value. Defaults to a pinned stable version.
Signing assumes version \fB2015\-02\-21\fR or later, where \fBContent\-Length\fR is signed blank (not \fB0\fR) when zero; earlier versions are not supported.
.TP
.BI \-\-header " k:v"
Additional header (repeatable). Accepts \fBname: value\fR or \fBname=value\fR. Used for StringToSign fixed headers (Content\-Type, Content\-Length, …) and \fBx\-ms\-*\fR CanonicalizedHeaders. (\fBx\-ms\-date\fR/\fBx\-ms\-version\fR have dedicated flags \(em prefer those.)

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
The computed header was written to stdout.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em unknown subcommand, missing required flag, invalid flag value, conflicting flags
(e.g. two stdin secret references), or unexpected positional.
Stderr carries the message.
.TP
.B 126
Runtime error \(em keychain access failure, key file not found, an empty/whitespace\-only resolved secret, signing error, or output write failure.
Stderr carries the message.

.SH EXAMPLES
Basic authentication with password from keychain:
.RS
.nf
curl \-H "$(mkauth basic \-\-user alice \-\-password 'vault:myapp/password')" \\
     https://api.example.com/data
.fi
.RE

OAuth 1.0a 3\-legged signed request with HMAC\-SHA1:
.RS
.nf
curl \-H "$(mkauth oauth1 \-\-method GET \\
              \-\-url 'https://api.example.com/timeline?count=10' \\
              \-\-consumer\-key mykey \-\-consumer\-secret env:CONSUMER_SECRET \\
              \-\-token mytoken \-\-token\-secret env:TOKEN_SECRET)" \\
     'https://api.example.com/timeline?count=10'
.fi
.RE

JWT HS256 with 1\-hour expiry:
.RS
.nf
mkauth jwt \-\-alg HS256 \-\-key 'vault:myapp/jwt\-secret' \\
           \-\-iss myapp \-\-sub user123 \-\-exp 1h
.fi
.RE

JWT RS256 from a PEM file:
.RS
.nf
curl \-H "$(mkauth jwt \-\-alg RS256 \-\-key file:service\-account.pem \\
              \-\-iss svc@project.iam.gserviceaccount.com \\
              \-\-aud https://api.example.com/ \-\-exp 1h \-\-iat)" \\
     https://api.example.com/data
.fi
.RE

Bearer token from environment:
.RS
.nf
curl \-H "$(mkauth bearer \-\-token env:ACCESS_TOKEN)" \\
     https://api.example.com/data
.fi
.RE

Azure Storage Blob GET:
.RS
.nf
curl \-H "x\-ms\-date: $(date \-u '+%a, %d %b %Y %H:%M:%S GMT')" \\
     \-H "x\-ms\-version: 2023\-11\-03" \\
     \-H "$(mkauth azure\-storage \-\-account mystorageacct \\
               \-\-key env:STORAGE_KEY \-\-method GET \\
               \-\-url 'https://mystorageacct.blob.core.windows.net/c/b')" \\
     'https://mystorageacct.blob.core.windows.net/c/b'
.fi
.RE

Show the OAuth 1.0a signature base string for debugging:
.RS
.nf
mkauth oauth1 \-\-method POST \-\-url https://api.example.com/post \\
              \-\-consumer\-key k \-\-consumer\-secret env:CS \\
              \-\-show\-base\-string
.fi
.RE

Generic HMAC for other schemes (use digest, not mkauth):
.RS
.nf
printf '%s.%s' "$ts" "$body" | digest \-\-hmac sha256 \-\-key\-env WEBHOOK_SECRET \-\-base64
.fi
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output.
.B mkauth
output is plain; this flag is accepted for suite consistency.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR curl (1),
.BR digest (1),
.BR envvault (1),
.BR mksecret (1)
