.TH CLIP 1 "2026-05-08" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
clip \- cross-platform clipboard bridge

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B clip
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
\fIcommand\fR | \fBclip\fR
.br
.B clip
\fB--clear\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clip
reads from and writes to the system clipboard with identical behaviour on Windows, macOS, and Linux.
The unified autodetect rule: with no input,
.B clip
pastes; with content on stdin,
.B clip
copies. This holds across every supported environment including interactive TTY, redirected pipe with content, redirected pipe with no content (Git Bash / MSYS / Cygwin where stdin reports redirected even interactively, or an explicit empty pipe like \fB: | clip\fR).
Explicit \fB--copy\fR and \fB--paste\fR flags override autodetection; in scripts where the producer may pipe empty content, use \fB--copy\fR explicitly for deterministic copy behaviour. Use \fBclip --copy < /dev/null\fR to copy an empty string, or \fBclip --clear\fR to empty the clipboard.
.PP
Modes are mutually exclusive: at most one of \fB--copy\fR, \fB--paste\fR, \fB--clear\fR. \fB--raw\fR only applies to paste; combining \fB--raw\fR with \fB--copy\fR or \fB--clear\fR is rejected with exit 125.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-copy
Force copy mode (read stdin to clipboard), overriding autodetect.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-paste
Force paste mode (read clipboard to stdout), overriding autodetect.
.TP
.B \-\-clear
Empty the clipboard, overriding autodetect.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-raw
Do not strip the trailing newline on paste.
.TP
.B \-\-primary
Target X11/Wayland PRIMARY selection (Linux only; ignored elsewhere). The PRIMARY selection is the X11 middle-click buffer. Applies to copy, paste, and clear: \fBcat foo | clip --primary\fR copies to PRIMARY, \fBclip --primary\fR pastes from it, \fBclip --primary --clear\fR clears it.
.TP
.BR \-\-color ", " \-\-no\-color
Respect \fBNO_COLOR\fR. \fBclip\fR has no coloured output of its own; flags are accepted for suite consistency.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Accepted for suite consistency. \fBclip\fR emits no records, so \fB--json\fR is a no-op.
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON for AI discoverability.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH NEWLINE HANDLING
Copy is byte-preserving. Paste strips exactly one trailing \fB\\n\fR or \fB\\r\\n\fR by default to match \fB$(...)\fR shell-substitution semantics. Pass \fB--raw\fR to disable the strip.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. Empty clipboard on paste also returns 0 with empty stdout.
.TP
.B 125
Invalid flags, conflicting modes, or invalid UTF-8 input.
.TP
.B 126
Clipboard busy (Windows) or helper binary failed (Linux/macOS).
.TP
.B 127
No clipboard helper found on Linux (install \fBwl-clipboard\fR, \fBxclip\fR, or \fBxsel\fR).

.SH EXAMPLES
Paste:
.RS
.nf
clip
.fi
.RE

Copy:
.RS
.nf
echo hello | clip
.fi
.RE

Clear:
.RS
.nf
clip --clear
.fi
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
On Linux, if set, clip prefers \fBwl-copy\fR/\fBwl-paste\fR over X11 helpers.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output (clip has no colour itself; flag accepted for suite consistency).

.SH NOTES
.SS Git Bash / MSYS / Cygwin on Windows
On MSYS-derived shells (Git Bash, MSYS2, Cygwin), pipes always present stdin as redirected to the child process even when the user typed \fBclip\fR interactively at the prompt. \fBclip\fR handles this by inspecting the actual byte content of stdin rather than relying on \fBisatty()\fR / Console.IsInputRedirected. Empty redirected stdin is treated as paste, so \fBclip\fR with no flags always pastes — matching user expectation regardless of shell. Use \fBclip --copy < /dev/null\fR if you specifically need to copy an empty string.
.SS Unicode on cmd.exe
\fBclip\fR sets its own stdio encoding to UTF-8 (code page 65001) for the duration of each call, but does not change the parent shell's persistent code page. If \fBcmd.exe\fR is in a legacy OEM code page, the producer in \fBecho \U0001F30D | clip\fR will replace the emoji with \fB?\fR before the bytes reach \fBclip\fR. Run \fBchcp 65001\fR once in your \fBcmd.exe\fR session, or use PowerShell 7+, Windows Terminal, or Git Bash, all of which default to UTF-8.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pbcopy (1),
.BR pbpaste (1),
.BR xclip (1),
.BR xsel (1),
.BR wl-copy (1),
.BR wl-paste (1)
