.TH PROTECT 1 "2026-04-21" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
protect \- cross-platform encrypt-at-rest using native OS key stores
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B protect
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR]
.br
.B protect
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B protect
encrypts files or streams using the native key-storage primitive of the current OS.
On Windows, it wraps DPAPI (\fBDataProtectionScope.CurrentUser\fR or \fBLocalMachine\fR).
On macOS, it uses AES-256-GCM with a key stored in the Keychain.
On Linux, it uses AES-256-GCM with a key stored in libsecret.

Encrypted files are scoped to the current user and machine by default.
Moving an encrypted file to a different user or machine fails — the OS key is no longer available.
This is deliberate: zero key management means no portability.

Output is a \fB.prot\fR file (or stdout if piping).
Input can be a file, stdin (default), or explicit \fB-\fR for stdin.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o " " \fIPATH\fR ", " \-\-output " " \fIPATH\fR
Write encrypted output to \fIPATH\fR instead of the default \fIFILE\fR\fB.prot\fR (file mode) or stdout (stdin mode).
Mutually exclusive with \fB--in-place\fR.
Cannot be equal to the input path.

.TP
.B \-\-in\-place
Encrypt the file in place using atomic rename (temp write → verify → rename).
Mutually exclusive with \fB-o\fR / \fB--output\fR.
The \fB--rm\fR / \fB--remove-source\fR flag is implicit (the source is atomically renamed).

.TP
.BR \-\-rm ", " \-\-remove\-source
Delete the source file after successful round-trip verification.
Paired with explicit output path, keeps the source.
Implied by \fB--in-place\fR.

.TP
.BR \-\-scope " " [\fBuser\fR | \fBmachine\fR]
Key-derivation scope.
Default: \fBuser\fR (encrypt for the current OS user).
.RS
.IP \fBuser\fR 8
Windows: DPAPI \fBCurrentUser\fR scope.
macOS: login Keychain (user-accessible).
Linux: user session (default, only option).
.IP \fBmachine\fR 8
Windows: DPAPI \fBLocalMachine\fR scope.
macOS: System Keychain (requires root/admin).
Linux: not supported; \fBprotect\fR fails with exit 125.
.RE

.TP
.B \-\-no\-verify
Skip round-trip verification.
After encryption, the tool normally re-opens the encrypted file, decrypts it, and compares the hash.
This catches bugs in framing, key derivation, or AEAD logic.
\fB--no-verify\fR is faster but provides less assurance.

.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Overwrite an existing destination file.
By default \fBprotect\fR refuses to clobber an existing destination and exits 125.
With \fB--force\fR the existing destination is removed and re-created exclusively (POSIX \fBO_EXCL\fR).
This is symlink-safe: a symlink at the destination is unlinked itself rather than written through to its target,
so an attacker cannot redirect the write by planting a symlink (e.g. to \fI/etc/passwd\fR) at the output path.

.TP
.BR \-\-color [=\fIWHEN\fR]
Coloured output: auto (default when omitted), always, or never.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable coloured output. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.

.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.

.TP
.B \-\-help
Show help and exit.

.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH FILE MODES
.TP
.B Positional file argument
.B protect FILE
encrypts \fIFILE\fR to \fIFILE\fR\fB.prot\fR (keeps the original).
Use \fB-o\fR, \fB--in-place\fR, or \fB--rm\fR to customize.

.TP
.B Stdin (default or explicit \fB-\fR)
.B protect < FILE
or
.B protect -
reads from stdin and writes to stdout (or \fB-o PATH\fR).

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Encrypt a config file, keep the original:
.B protect config.json
.TP
Encrypt in place (atomic):
.B protect config.json \-\-in\-place
.TP
Encrypt and delete the original after verification:
.B protect api.key \-\-rm
.TP
Encrypt for the machine (Windows/macOS only):
.B protect \-\-scope machine service\-config.xml
.TP
Encrypt from stdin to an output file:
.B cat secret.txt | protect \-o secret.prot
.TP
Compose with digest: encrypt an HMAC key:
.B protect api.key \-\-rm
.TP
Decrypt and pipe to another tool:
.B unprotect < api.key.prot | digest \-\-hmac sha256 \-\-key\-stdin "payload"

.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error: bad flags, output path equals input, unsupported scope on Linux, format mismatch.
.TP
.B 126
Runtime error: encryption failed, key store unavailable, round-trip verification failed, permission denied.

.SH PLATFORM NOTES
.SS Windows
Both user and machine scopes are supported.
Machine scope requires the process to have DPAPI LocalMachine access (typically admin or SYSTEM context).
Files encrypted with user scope cannot be decrypted by a different user.
.SS macOS
User scope uses the login Keychain (user-accessible).
Machine scope uses the System Keychain and requires root or admin privileges.
The key is auto-generated on first encryption and stored in Keychain; subsequent operations retrieve it.
.SS Linux
Only user scope is supported.
Machine scope fails with exit 125.
libsecret-tools must be installed: \fBsudo apt install libsecret-tools\fR (Debian/Ubuntu) or equivalent.
The key is auto-generated and stored in the libsecret store (typically `~/.local/share/secrets` or systemd user service).

.SH FILE FORMAT
Encrypted files start with a 22-byte header: magic (\fBWPRT\fR), version (1), backend marker, and a 16-byte random FileId.
The backend-marker byte identifies which key store encrypted the file
(\fB0x01\fR DPAPI-user, \fB0x02\fR DPAPI-machine, \fB0x10\fR Keychain-user, \fB0x11\fR Keychain-machine, \fB0x20\fR libsecret-user).
Files are then chunked (64 KB per chunk) and each chunk is encrypted with either DPAPI (Windows) or AES-256-GCM (macOS/Linux).
Every chunk is bound to its specific file and position via the FileId, chunk index, and final-chunk flag (in AEAD AAD on Keychain/libsecret;
inside the protected blob on DPAPI). This detects truncation, chunk reorder, and cross-file substitution.

.SH INTEGRITY MODEL
The per-chunk binding defends against an attacker with write access to the \fB.prot\fR file but no key access
(untrusted backup software, cloud sync, shared NAS). It does not defend against an attacker who already has
key access — the OS keystore, not the file format, is the trust boundary in that case.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR unprotect (1) \- decrypt files encrypted by protect
.BR digest (1) \- cryptographic hashing and HMAC
.BR protect \-\-describe \- structured metadata
.BR protect \-\-help \- human-readable help
