.TH IDS 1 "2026-04-18" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ids \- cross-platform identifier generator

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ids
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ids
generates identifiers from four types: UUID v4, UUID v7 (default), ULID, and NanoID.
It runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS as a single AOT-compiled native binary with no runtime dependency.
Output is one ID per line by default; use \fB--json\fR for a JSON array.

UUID v7 and ULID are time-ordered and monotonic within each millisecond, making them suitable as database primary keys.
NanoID produces short, URL-safe strings with configurable length and alphabet.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-t " " \fIT\fR ", " \-\-type " " \fIT\fR
ID type to generate.
Valid values: \fBuuid4\fR, \fBuuid7\fR (default), \fBulid\fR, \fBnanoid\fR.
.TP
.BR \-n " " \fIN\fR ", " \-\-count " " \fIN\fR
Number of IDs to generate (default 1, must be \(>= 1).
.TP
.BR \-l " " \fIN\fR ", " \-\-length " " \fIN\fR
Output length for NanoID (default 21, must be \(>= 1).
Exit 125 if used with \fBuuid4\fR, \fBuuid7\fR, or \fBulid\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-alphabet " " \fIA\fR
NanoID alphabet preset.
Valid values: \fBurl-safe\fR (default, A\(enZa\(en z0\(en9_\(en), \fBalphanum\fR (A\(enZa\(enz0\(en9), \fBhex\fR (0\(en9a\(enf), \fBlower\fR (a\(enz0\(en9), \fBupper\fR (A\(enZ0\(en9).
Exit 125 if used with \fBuuid4\fR, \fBuuid7\fR, or \fBulid\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-format " " \fIF\fR
UUID output format.
Valid values: \fBdefault\fR (hyphenated, lowercase), \fBhex\fR (32 hex chars, no hyphens), \fBbraces\fR (\fB{xxxxxxxx-\&...\&}\fR), \fBurn\fR (\fBurn:uuid:xxxxxxxx-\&...\&\fR).
Exit 125 if used with \fBulid\fR or \fBnanoid\fR.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-uppercase
Uppercase UUID output.
Exit 125 if used with \fBulid\fR (already uppercase) or \fBnanoid\fR (use \fB--alphabet upper\fR instead).
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit a single JSON array to stdout.
Each element has \fB"id"\fR and \fB"type"\fR fields.
NanoID elements also include \fB"length"\fR and \fB"alphabet"\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.
.TP
.B \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR
\fBauto\fR, \fBalways\fR, or \fBnever\fR. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Equivalent to \fB--color never\fR.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em invalid flags, unknown type/format/alphabet value, flag/type mismatch, or count/length \(<= 0.

.SH EXAMPLES
Generate one UUID v7 (default):
.RS
.nf
ids
.fi
.RE

Generate a random UUID v4:
.RS
.nf
ids --type uuid4
.fi
.RE

Generate one ULID:
.RS
.nf
ids --type ulid
.fi
.RE

Generate five UUID v7s:
.RS
.nf
ids --count 5
.fi
.RE

Generate a 12-character hex NanoID:
.RS
.nf
ids --type nanoid --length 12 --alphabet hex
.fi
.RE

Windows-registry-style GUID (braces, uppercase):
.RS
.nf
ids --type uuid7 --format braces --uppercase
.fi
.RE

URN-prefixed UUID:
.RS
.nf
ids --type uuid7 --format urn
.fi
.RE

JSON array of three IDs:
.RS
.nf
ids --count 3 --json
.fi
.RE

Pipe an ID to the clipboard:
.RS
.nf
ids | clip
.fi
.RE

Verify monotonic ordering of 1000 ULIDs:
.RS
.nf
ids --type ulid --count 1000 | sort -c
.fi
.RE

.SH MONOTONICITY
For time-ordered types (\fBuuid7\fR and \fBulid\fR), IDs generated within the same millisecond sort strictly in generation order.
UUID v7 monotonicity is enforced with an application-level guard because .NET 10's \fBGuid.CreateVersion7()\fR does not guarantee intra-millisecond ordering on its own.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output. \fBids\fR output is plain; this flag is accepted for suite consistency.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR uuidgen (1),
.BR clip (1)
