.TH MKSECRET 1 "2026-05-28" "Winix" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mksecret \- cross-platform secret generator

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mksecret
[\fIpassword\fR]
[\fB\-\-length\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-charset\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-\-count\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-json\fR]
[\fB\-\-quiet\fR]

.B mksecret phrase
[\fB\-\-words\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-sep\fR \fISTR\fR]
[\fB\-\-capitalize\fR]
[\fB\-\-number\fR]
[\fB\-\-count\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-json\fR]
[\fB\-\-quiet\fR]

.B mksecret key
[\fB\-\-bytes\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-encoding\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-\-count\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-json\fR]
[\fB\-\-quiet\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mksecret
generates cryptographic secrets in three modes.
All modes use the OS CSPRNG — there is no insecure fallback.

.B password
(default when no subcommand is given) selects characters uniformly at random from a named character set.
The default is a 20-character alphanumeric password.

.B phrase
selects words uniformly at random from the EFF long wordlist (7776 words, approximately 12.9 bits per word).
Six words gives approximately 77 bits of entropy.

.B key
generates raw random bytes and encodes them as base64url (default), base64, hex, or Crockford base32.
Suitable for HMAC signing keys, API tokens, and session secrets.

Unless \fB--quiet\fR or \fB--json\fR is given, an entropy estimate (\fB\(ap N bits\fR) is written to stderr after generation.
Secrets are written to stdout, one per line.

.SH OPTIONS

.SS Common flags (all modes)
.TP
.BR \-n " " \fIN\fR ", " \-\-count " " \fIN\fR
Number of secrets to emit, one per line. Default 1 (max 100000).
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit a JSON envelope to stdout instead of plain lines.
Shape: \fB{"mode":..., "bits":..., "values":[...]}\fR.
Suppresses the stderr entropy note.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Suppress the stderr entropy note.
.TP
.B \-\-describe
Emit structured JSON metadata for AI discoverability.
.TP
.B \-\-color " " \fIWHEN\fR
\fBauto\fR, \fBalways\fR, or \fBnever\fR. Respects \fBNO_COLOR\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Equivalent to \fB--color never\fR.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.SS password mode
.TP
.BR \-l " " \fIN\fR ", " \-\-length " " \fIN\fR
Password length in characters. Default 20 (max 4096).
.TP
.BR \-c " " \fINAME\fR ", " \-\-charset " " \fINAME\fR
Character set to draw from. Valid values:
.RS
.TP
.B alphanumeric
(default) A\(enZa\(enz0\(en9, 62 characters.
.TP
.B full
All printable ASCII code points 33\(en126, 94 characters. Includes symbols.
.TP
.B alpha
A\(enZa\(enz, 52 characters. Letters only.
.TP
.B digits
0\(en9, 10 characters.
.TP
.B safe
Alphanumeric minus visually\-ambiguous l, 1, I, O, 0, o. 56 characters.
.RE

.SS phrase mode
.TP
.BR \-w " " \fIN\fR ", " \-\-words " " \fIN\fR
Number of words. Default 6 (max 1024).
.TP
.BR \-s " " \fISTR\fR ", " \-\-sep " " \fISTR\fR
Separator between words. Default \fB\-\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-capitalize
Capitalise the first letter of each word.
.TP
.B \-\-number
Append a random digit (0\(en9) to the passphrase. Adds approximately 3.3 bits.

.SS key mode
.TP
.BR \-b " " \fIN\fR ", " \-\-bytes " " \fIN\fR
Number of random bytes to generate. Default 32 (256-bit, max 65536).
.TP
.BR \-e " " \fINAME\fR ", " \-\-encoding " " \fINAME\fR
Encoding. Valid values:
.RS
.TP
.B base64url
(default) URL-safe base64, unpadded.
.TP
.B base64
Standard base64 with \fB=\fR padding.
.TP
.B hex
Lowercase hexadecimal.
.TP
.B base32
Crockford base32 (no ambiguous characters: no I, L, O, U).
.RE

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 125
Usage error \(em unknown subcommand flag, bad \fB--charset\fR/\fB--encoding\fR value, non-positive or oversized
\fB--length\fR/\fB--bytes\fR/\fB--words\fR/\fB--count\fR, or unexpected positional. Stderr carries the message.
.TP
.B 126
Runtime error \(em OS CSPRNG failure or output write failure. Stderr carries the message.

.SH EXAMPLES
20-character alphanumeric password (default):
.RS
.nf
mksecret
.fi
.RE

32-character password with symbols:
.RS
.nf
mksecret --length 32 --charset full
.fi
.RE

Avoid visually-ambiguous characters:
.RS
.nf
mksecret --charset safe
.fi
.RE

Six-word EFF diceware passphrase:
.RS
.nf
mksecret phrase
.fi
.RE

Eight words, space-separated, title-cased with a trailing digit:
.RS
.nf
mksecret phrase --words 8 --sep ' ' --capitalize --number
.fi
.RE

32-byte key as unpadded base64url (256-bit, default):
.RS
.nf
mksecret key
.fi
.RE

64-byte key as hex:
.RS
.nf
mksecret key --bytes 64 --encoding hex
.fi
.RE

Five passwords, one per line:
.RS
.nf
mksecret --count 5
.fi
.RE

JSON envelope:
.RS
.nf
mksecret phrase --json
.fi
.RE

Copy a generated password to the clipboard:
.RS
.nf
mksecret | clip
.fi
.RE

Generate a 32-byte HMAC key and save it, then use it with digest:
.RS
.nf
mksecret key --bytes 32 > signing.key
digest --hmac sha256 --key-file signing.key "payload"
.fi
.RE

.SH CLIPBOARD CAVEAT
.B Note:
clipboard contents may be persisted by clipboard history managers, synced across devices, and are readable by any process with clipboard access.
.B mksecret
does not clear the clipboard after copying.
Use
.B clip --clear
after pasting, or disable clipboard history for sensitive secrets.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disables colour output.
.B mksecret
output is plain; this flag is accepted for suite consistency.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR clip (1),
.BR digest (1)
